thank you thank you for the introduction
the invitation can we speak with you
today I'm going to try to this
relatively brief for the schedule but I
want to the same time introduce you or
to injuries talk a little bit about this
the stack this book we just published
last last month of MIT press who's a 500
pages and 20 minutes so we'll see if we
can get through this but you know
philosophy end up not working it's at
least you can weaponize it another other
more direct job more direct ways and
then this is as well the work just very
briefly is sort of a very
interdisciplinary center mix of
geopolitics design theory and computer
science it's so so a mix of a print of
analytical theoretical work it and
something that I think it was more of a
kind of multi scalar infrastructural
design brief that's meant to be
responded to more directly it also is
meant to propose in a way a kind of
model of totality of a big picture of
the whole something we've perhaps not so
good at anymore and it's also at least
within the specific problem political
science in relation to some of the
things that matter have been dealing
with in this book who also did the cover
by the way political science i think in
many ways doesn't have a very good way
it doesn't have very good ways of
dealing with computation as a topic or
subject matter it tends to sort of see
it as something that is to be governed
or something to be designed but not not
as the actual form of governance itself
and so that's part of what we're trying
to shift here I suppose in another way
perhaps in contrast to some first talk
this morning it's it's not really not a
utopian or dystopian story I think it's
sort of a bit of both and hopefully in
some interesting and overlapping wise
okay so very quickly the two key
arguments about planetary scale
computation that the book tries to
develop one that it distorts and deforms
modern was falling logics of political
geography
and it creates new territories in its
own image second that the various genres
of computation of smart grids cloud
platforms mobile apps smart cities
Internet of Things automation should be
seen not so much as so many species
evolving out on their own but as
something that is forming a coherent
whole an accidental mega structure
called the stack that is both a
computational apparatus and a new
governing architecture at the same time
we are in it and it is in us and so the
architecture of this model treats these
overlapping layers it's their claims and
networks not as exceptions to the to the
normal but the exception to the rule but
is the basis of a emergent order and so
it initial very quickly go through in
the structure this talk comprises these
six interdependent layers of earth cloud
city address interface and user but
first what do I mean exactly by the
Westfall Ian political geography well in
a sense we can say that the modern
nation-state was among other things a
function of a particular kind of car to
graphic projection that conceived of the
earth as a horizontal plane filled with
various allotments of land in which
individual sovereign domains were
circumscribed and this topology became
the standard form of it's the geometry
amma trees of the political that would
exist in its in its wake but those loops
that loot apology gives way now to
another kind of topology in geography
one not a one that is built of multiple
totalities at once layered on top of one
another not one final last instant
sovereignty but multiple totality some
some state-based some extra steak based
on global some regional some modern some
archaic all claiming the same site or
person bit of data all at once it's not
that somehow the state goes away and to
into this virtualizes in some way just
as cloud platforms come to take on roles
traditionally assigned to modern states
so to the inverse that states themselves
evolve into cloud platforms
and so in regard to the a lacrosse as
Jared Cohen's of the world the
geopolitical domain is not as they say a
chess board with 196 pieces one for each
country rather it's a stack more like
196 squared heterogeneous jurisdictions
while fighting it out one amongst the
other and so the earth layer to start
with we assume that computation was
discovered at least as much as it was
invented the first part and that the the
stack as a whole draws upon the
computational capacity of the world its
energy and its mineral resources in
order to compose itself into drive the
power of the layers above pulling nacho
silicon but all others of a matter of
chemistry and energy including the
various heterogeneous minerals pulled
from the mountain streams of Central
Africa the stack Tara forms its host
planet by drinking and vomiting it's
elemental juices and spitting up mobile
phones the shiny surfaces of our
handsets demand Gore to feed the gloss
of its face one of the problems I think
sometimes in talking about same thing
there's a presumption rumors that some
are talking about digital or
computational technologies that we're
talking about something virtual
ephemeral immaterial the stack from the
cloud in particular is incredibly is a
physical heavy hungry beast long ago
past the airline industry and its total
carbon footprint but it's also something
we use in order to optimize and gain
efficiencies and the types of energy
that they're networked electrons that
it's possible to use to sustain our
system so and this has becomes the race
can we build the stack fast enough to
save us from the costs of building the
stack this conundrum was made clear to
me a couple years ago into Tom's on
panel with are going to me Stanley
Williams from HP who was part of a panel
but then Vice President Gore had
commissioned to try to pop off this I
what would the architecture of a
computer that could model the entire
world's climate in real time what would
it take to do this and they came up with
some estimates which was a 2-byte
computations a few orders of magnitude
more than
we have but the other sort of more
anti-climactic aspect of this was that
it was theoretically possible to build
such a computer but it would be roughly
the size of Paris and it would be the
single most significant anthropogenic
energy event that it itself would be
modeling which is in a nutshell the
accidental of the accident of the earth
layer itself so to the cloud the cloud
would sometimes think about these things
as saying placeless virtual geography
and some of the cloud is in no way
places it has a geography it's just a
very weird one the platforms of the
cloud layer are structured by dense
plural and non contiguous geographies a
hybrid of us a super jurisdiction and
the charter cities which would carve new
partially privatized public's from the
whole cloth of d sovereign lands it's
not a matter of borders just
disappearing or virtualizing it's more
than multiplication exponential map
location of borders on one on top of
another this larger geographical into a
political drama scene perhaps most
explicitly in the ongoing sino Google
conflicts of 2008 to the present China
hacking google google pulling out of
china the NSA hacking china the NSA
hacking google google ghost writing
books for the State Department Google
wordlessly circumventing the last
instances of state oversight altogether
not by transgressing them but by
absorbing them into its service offering
meanwhile Chinese router firmware by its
its time and so between the hackers of
the PLA and Google there's more than I
think a standoff between the proxies of
two State apparatuses there it is into
two geometries of territory one a
subdivision of the horizontal the other
stacking of vertical layers one estate
the other a pair of state one
superimposed on top of the other at any
point on the map never resolving into
some consensual cosmopolitanism City
layer some designers architects let's
say may see software as something added
on to space they see the idea of smart
cities as stupid because it assumes that
cities are not all
the intelligent and they're right some
designers programmers let's say may see
cities as modules of hardware that fit
together one one at a time into it into
that mega structural matrix and they too
are right and so one mode of design is
necessarily nested in the other and in
that nest Homo Sapien comes equipped
with an extraordinary array of sensory
faculties which is we may see are
augmented further by synthetic layers
and various ratios ranging from the
sensors and trackers and our phones that
we carry about like mules to more
intimate media of artificial images and
sounds situating ourselves in this
expanded field we are both sensors and
sensed on the one hand we are a primary
sapient actor in this drama supervising
an orchestra of sensing technologies
each individually capable of functional
processing and together of certain forms
of intelligence as are for example
neurons or other cells on the other we
are not only the subject of this
scenario we are also its subject matter
that wider urban landscape of synthetic
sensory systems is not only a platform
through which we extend and extrapolate
our capacities for abstraction it is
also capable of other sorts of
abstractions on its own and so cities
defined in this way with perspectives
mixed from the public from public health
planning and supply chain logistics our
infrastructure for both living and
nonliving matter to consume itself and
for some forms of matter to achieve and
hone sentient intelligence which in turn
remake cities in its own image in short
we should imagine something like an AI
urbanism a bit like a stroll into the
field populated by mutually oblivious
little life worlds or in terms of like
the world of the tick the latter waiting
laying in wait for some threshold event
to come its way at which point it
triggers its programmed responses
and into the void its own little void
into which it leaps many of our own many
of our urban sensors and their limited
forms of AI work similarly and perhaps
with similar nobility more versatile
synthetic intelligences occupy more
complex felt some a predator summer prey
some are in motion some are flowering
some pollinating and as we stroll among
them we may be registered by them or we
may be ignored we may be the primary
cause of concern or we may be a passing
interference in an evolutionary dynamic
in which we are neither protagonist nor
target and so through this nesting the
city layer the stack is then also the
home for an urban scale AI a commingling
of diverse sensors of light and air and
sound and chemistry drawing a landscape
of sensing and thinking little species
partially embodied discreetly one with
another and partially Co embodied on
with another as their information inputs
are aggregated and modeled and act upon
acted upon in various pluralities the AI
city maybe embodying itself but not as
humans do and so it's not just the AI in
the city but nested AI embodied as the
city with very different kinds of
organized organism to population could
genome to niche to signal morphologies
at work the work of abstraction then for
art and design urbanism is then not just
to employ deploy abstract forms but is
set in motion mechanisms and programs
that are capable of their own feats of
abstraction and to calibrate how they
abstract us and one another accordingly
to the address layer very very quickly
swirling just a bit closer to the top of
our stack image we see that any instance
singular or plural of matter particle or
wave or relation it's potentially
identified by massive Universal
addressing systems in which mapping and
linking tool provide for Avogadro's
number of
dresses allotted to every user the
global credential of the address then
subdivides these heterogeneous
territories hard and soft Hertzian space
and carbon space into dis integrated
communicative erase an atmospheric
metropolis built of digit strings or
something to appear to the stack that is
it must be addressed its position is
then both the mapping problem and a set
theory problem ipv6 for example as we
know allows in principle something like
128-bit address during something like 10
to the 23 addresses per person obviously
not entirely I in exploring sort of what
the granularity material granularity of
this would imply my lab at UCSD a few
years ago we were interested in and how
small of an IP address could you could
you make if in principle you you know
you're working down to a granularity of
cells and molecules of what could be
addressed can we actually even write an
address at the scale and so you need
this the finest point pen that there is
and so we wrote this IP address with
electron lithography beam into a silicon
wafer photographed it with scanning
electronic microscope the address and
the picture is about 10 micrometers in
width which is about the size of a red
blood cell each digit about 40 to 50
nanometers in thickness but obviously
actually in terms of we'd have to go
much smaller than this in terms for to
really work practically for nanomedicine
and things the interface we could define
an interface basically in general senses
as any point of contact between two
complex systems which governs the
condition of exchange between those
systems are predominant genre of the
interface for today is the graphical
user interface buttons with words on it
and so we've become in one way or
another a species of button pushers it's
how we interact with the stack and how
the stack interacts with us the
complexity of the stack all the things
that you might do with it it might do
with you through anyone interfacial
point is too complex to
comprehending and so we require by
necessity the synthetic summary maps of
all of the possibilities which are those
interfacial diagrams that show is where
things are and what can be done with
them they provide both signification and
a framing of significance in this regard
and so as the interfaces multiply one on
the other they assemble into interfacial
regimes which present and enforce these
diagrammatic total images and four and
frame how it is the platform can work
for any user who perceives that platform
through the grammar of this regime its
form to shifting to AR and VR and AR in
particular I fear that ultimately a less
secular danger than at pervasive
advertising is latent in AR and that its
most killer app may not be marketing but
fundamentalist religion AR promises the
design of a kind of differential sacral
T whereby the black white black versus
white theological segmentation of the
polis and to friend and enemy becomes a
direct literal annotation on to the
lifeworld the subtitling of perception
of into things into clean and unclean
hours and there's sacred and profane
rebel and empire forces or cannot work
Red Team Blue team but that's not the
only path we might take it also may
allow for forms of empathetic cinematic
co experience we can scarcely imagine
today allowing for Co embodied users
across locations and for the induction
and deduction of far more complex energy
flows such as between energy and
currency into more of a matter of course
there's a quick shout out to this so
because we have four seats each other
company of a that I'm involved with this
startup from our lab UCSD called nano VR
is a VR based nano engineering design
platform that allows you to draw upon
existing geometric structures with the
very accurate molecular imaging
geometries or start from scratch to
build atom by atom new proteins
molecules and to simulate their
interactions who's developed as I said
lab a UCSD with the scripps research
institute molecular graphics laboratory
what principle allow anything that
involves visualization of complex
interactions at this scale and not just
for scientists it's starting with table
of elements instead of the brick anybody
who could build 3d and minecraft can now
make complex nano biotechnological forms
in VR and so the script kiddie
extinction event is nigh lastly to the
user we require I think I rather more
fundamental and difficult I'm sure
redefinition of the political
subjectivity of the user in relationship
to its real operations because what it
does what we already do with it let
alone what it's going to do is much
weirder than our current vocabulary will
allow for and that's because platforms
and I argue that the stack is a platform
not all platforms are stacks platforms
don't ultimately care if a user is
animal vegetable or mineral as all users
have platform sovereignty insecurities
speak a user is credential eyes by three
qualifications something you know like a
password something you are like a
fingerprint and something you have or
something you have like a keycard and so
if someone or something can be have and
or no it can be a user trading algorithm
driverless car a song popular' arive a
chemical reaction triggering a threshold
event in an environmental sensor
embedded on a leaf in a rainforest all
users platforms don't care if the state
sees you as an illegal immigrant or if
the market sees us and externality and
so while this stage is a certain kind of
death of the humanist user in one sense
the eclipse of a certain resolute
humanism it does so because it also
brings the multiplication and
proliferation of other kinds of
non-human and inhuman or XO human users
including sensors and alko's the robots
from nanometric to landscape scale any
combination of which one might enter
into in relationship as part of a
composite user any of us that is which
brings us of course the Alpha go and
deep dream the most interesting I think
sort of challenge of the latter is is
not just a sort of you know admire its
handiwork but also to sort of em
pathetically attempt in a way to see as
it sees and to think of AI in a way that
goes beyond the the kind of Turing test
prejudices of assuming that an AI is
recognizably intelligent to the extent
that it will perform intelligence in the
way in which humans think that humans
think also we could say that if deep
dreams images are artifacts of the
computers hallucinations of phantom
conclusions then the conspiratorial
figure cut by the evil Google stepfather
is perhaps that same paranoid vision
turned inside out and back on itself
perhaps Google the AI is as paranoid and
how it sees us as some of us are in how
we see it it's not coincidental then
that as AI matures its own pattern
recognition faculties would reach the
plateau of a creative apophenia so
important to our own pattern our own
evolution in pattern recognition now
dealing with the fact that the platform
user position undermines the primacy of
huge human agency will inevitably drive
a strong pushback one you can expect the
pushback to be in some ways as fervent
as it is irrational there are some
affinities with technologies however
fictitious or bizarre they may be that
are thought to embody the essence of a
creationist order one of these is food
especially for the left or personal
mastery over equipment and mung dishes
the car and I based on some
conversations with some colleagues I've
spoken with it at working on various
autonomous vehicle projects under the
legal standpoint III don't think it
would be so surprising if we were to a
movement to identify human-driven
automobiles as a type of arms and that
the Second Amendment to the Constitution
now used to shield gun owners from
obvious liabilities to protect their
owners sense of personal
minyan will be flown to keep human
beings behind steering wheels your life
may be ended by someone encased in a
two-ton steel box careening down the
asphalt Vista trying to prove a point
about how technology will never capture
his natural humanity I'll conclude then
with some thoughts then as I said on the
stack we have in a bid on what I in the
book called up the black stack the
generic figure for all of the alternate
totalities to come stack so of course
designed to be everything to be replaced
on each later they are modular they are
a kind of theseus paradox infrastructure
the the stack we have is that says
defined not only by its form its layers
and platforms and interrelations but
also by its its content and is now
painfully clear leak after leak that its
content is also the content of our daily
communications now weaponized against us
still Copernican traumas that abolish
the false centrality and specialness of
human thought in species being a
priceless accomplishments and the advent
of robust inhuman AI and the geopolitics
that could ensue from it were we willing
to compose it will provide for similar
disenchantment ones that should enable
more reality based understanding of
ourselves or situation and a fuller and
more complex understanding of what
intelligence is and is not from there we
can hopefully make our world with a
greater confidence that our models are
good approximations of what's out there
always a helpful thing that is to say
that Anthropocene is not just about the
rain of humans it's about a rain of a
particular kind of humanism and to
survive it we must graduate beyond the
notion I argue that human the human
experience of human experience is a the
central purpose of a world given there
for us and be something that is separate
from our own biotechnological
evolutionary emergence which is of
course ongoing
and so my critique that is not of humans
might as I say some of my best friends
are humans it's it's of the of the a
particular human is hangover I folk
psychology that weaves fake asceticism
populists solipsism and various
naturalistic fallacies into a political
aesthetics to me it is the theological
of a mode of global dwelling that sees
the world as here for us and this to me
this human exceptionalism is the exact
recipe of the Anthropocene and it would
it it makes it far too difficult for us
to see that the geo design project that
we really have a tower on our table more
as what it should be it is more like
molecular gastronomy at landscape scale
a restored and re sorted ecology
designed to taste itself in new forms of
richly spiced and imaginatively sauced
mutual ingestion and / then our specific
situation if the panopticon effect is
when you don't know you are being
watched or not and so behave as if you
are then the inverse panopticon effect
is when you know you're being watched
but act as if you aren't this is today's
surveillance culture exhibitionism in
bad faith the emergence of stack
platforms doesn't promise any solution
or even distinctions between friend and
enemy and within this optics when
considered versus the Google caliphate
perhaps the NSA may even come to be seen
by some as the public option at least
it's accountable and principled to some
parliamentary limits they may say rather
than merely stakeholder a ver isso on
flimsy user agreements if we take 911 in
the rollout of the patriot act as year
zero for the USA's massive data
gathering encapsulation and digestion
campaign one where only now beginning to
comprehend even as parallel projects in
China and Russia and Europe come to
light then we should imagine the
entirety of network communications for
is last decade the big haul as a single
deep and wide digital simulation of the
world or a significant section of it
it's an archive a library of the real
its existence as the purloined property
of the state just as a physical fact is
almost a cult almost the geo
philosophical profile of the big hall
from the energy necessary to preserve it
to its governing instrumentality
understood as a as a text very large
text and as a machine with various
utilities overflows the traditional
politics of software its story is much
more boorish than Lawrence Lessig and
its fate is as well can it be destroyed
is it possible to delete this simulation
and is it even desirable to do so is
there a trash can big enough for the big
delete even if the plug could be pulled
on all future data halls stopping it
immediately surely there must be a
backup somewhere the identical double of
the simulation such that if we delete
one the other will be forever haunting
history until it's rediscovered by
future AI archaeologists interested in
their own Paleolithic origins would we
bury it even if we could would we need
signs around it like those designed for
Yucca Mountain nuclear waste disposal
site warning off unknowable future
excavations those of us lucky enough to
be alive during this 15-year span would
enjoy then a certain illegible
immortality curious to whatever
metacognitive entity pieces us back
together by our online activities both
public and private proud and furtive
each of us rising back centuries from
now each of us a little Ozymandias of
cat videos and porn hub for some dramas
but hopefully not for the fabrication of
the stack to come black or otherwise a
certain humanism and a companion figure
of humanity still presumes
its traditional place in the center of
the frame we must let go of the demand
that synthetic intelligence arriving at
sentience or sapiens in whatever way
must care deeply about humanity
specifically as the subject and object
of its knowing its end its desire the
real nightmare worse than the the one in
which the Big Machine wants to go sorry
I wanted to start the worst nightmare
worse than the one in which the Big
Machine wants to kill you is the one in
which it sees you as irrelevant not even
as a discrete thing to know worse than
being seen as an enemy is not being seen
at all or as Algeria rakowski puts that
the AI does not hate you it does not
love you but you are made out of atoms
that it can use for something else and
so one of the integral accidents
essential accidents of the stack may be
an anthracite all trauma that shifts us
from the design career as the authors of
the enthralling to the role of
supporting actors in the arrival of the
post Anthropocene the sakta come may
also be black because we cannot see our
own reflection in it in the last
instance its acceleration as geopolitics
is less eschatological and chemical
because it's grounding of time is based
lest on the premise of historical
dialectics then on the rod of isotope
decay it's drawn i believe by an inhuman
and in humanist molecular form finding
pre-cambrian flora change into P choil
changed into children's toys dinosaurs
changed into birds changed into
ceremonial headdresses computation
itself converted into whatever meta
machine comes next and stack into stack
to come thank